good evening everybody so wonderful to
see such a big crowd first I want to
thank you all very much for either being
part of inviting me to be part of this
distinguished speaker series or for
coming out to hear this tonight I'm
deeply honored to be included among the
extraordinary people who have spoken
before me in this historic venue but why
am I here I'm someone who until several
months ago you most likely had never
heard of two explanations oddly
paradoxical the first one is that I made
a decision early in my adult life to
write a book with a brash young
moderately successful real estate
developer who was mostly unknown outside
the United States actually it was mostly
unknown even outside New York City at
that time 30 years later this man did
something I could never have imagined
possible when I met him he decided to
run for president of the United States
and ten days from now that man god save
us
could become the leader of the free
world it's a terrifying thought and
indeed more specifically I'm here
tonight because shortly before Donald
Trump won the Republican nomination for
president back in July I made a decision
to publicly renounce the book I had
written and the man whose image and
persona I had helped to shape and define
tonight I want to talk to you about who
Donald Trump is and why I believe he
represents such a dangerous threat to
the future of our planet and I also want
to talk to you about the journey that
led me from serving as Trump's Boswell
in my mid 30s to becoming in my mid
sixties one of his most visible and
glamorous critics I began my career as a
journalist motivated by too often
conflicting ambitions on the one hand
I'd been raised by two parents who were
deeply committed to public service my
father was a scientist and an educator
my mother was a social activist and a
pioneering feminist I grew up believing
deeply that I had a responsibility to be
of service to others in my life and to
make a positive difference in the world
I also grew up with a burning ambition
to stand out individually to be
recognized as special by as many people
as possible as effective as my parents
were in their in their work in the world
they were deeply flawed as caregivers as
a child I never had the feeling of being
deeply loved or lovable I grew up
burdened by a deep sense of inadequacy
and a fierce hunger to prove my own
value by way of visible external
accomplishments I imagine that feeling
is not foreign to some of you who are
here tonight influenced by the
conflicting messages I got from my
parent
I arrived into adulthood with a deep
conflict between serving others and
serving myself between doing what I
perceived was the right thing and doing
whatever was necessary to feel more safe
and secure in the world and to attract
notice journalism seemed like a good way
to combine the two to be publicly
noticed and appreciated as a writer and
to do good as HL Mencken once put it by
afflicting the comfortable and
comforting the afflicted
it was while working for the magazine
New York that I first encountered Donald
Trump at the time Trump was a 38 year
old real estate developer who had
received some renown in New York by
building a very successful hotel atop
Grand Central Station on 42nd Street and
then a flashy condominium in a prized
Midtown location which he modestly named
Trump Tower in early 1985 I got wind
that Trump had purchased an existing
apartment building overlook overlooking
New York's Central Park South it was
another prized location but in this case
the tenants in the building were living
under the protection of rent control and
rent stabilization and paid very low
rent Trump's plan was to get rid of them
and turn the building into a luxury
condominium to help in that effort
he hired in a he hired a company that
specialized in what was known as
relocation or tenant relocation but what
that really meant was purposely breaking
the elevators so that tenants were
forced to walk up and down 15 flights of
stairs not replacing broken lights in
the hallways or purposely breaking the
lights and generally refusing to do any
kind of repairs all this was designed to
make life sufficiently miserable and
unbearable for the tenants that they
felt they had no choice but to move out
that of course was story enough but the
delicious addendum was that Trump was
failing miserably in his efforts
to get rid of these tenants in the
article I wrote I described his efforts
as a case study and how not to vacate a
building the story of a gang that
couldn't shoot straight a fugue of
failure a farce of bumbling and fumbling
the cover image for the article featured
an illustration of Trump
looking like a thug red-faced
sweating scowling he loved it and he
especially loved the cover photo tough
guy and he called to tell me so he
wanted to be a tough guy and he
immediately had this cover framed and
put it up on the wall over his desk and
I realized that Trump was like no one I
had ever met he was a journalist dream
because wherever he went he tended to do
something outrageous and that's never
changed several months later I went back
to interview him for another story in a
few minutes into our conversation he
mentioned that he just signed a deal
with the publisher Random House
prestigious publisher to do a book
what's it about I asked it's my
autobiography he replied you're only 38
I said you don't have that in order
biography yeah yeah I know he said but
I'm getting paid a lot of money to do it
and I'm going to do it if you're going
to write a book I said spontaneously you
ought to call it the art of the deal
people are a lot more interested in
deals than they are in your
autobiography the title had just popped
into my head
I like that Trump said you want to write
it
as much as it makes me cringe to say
this to you today I was hoping he would
say that I already knew the Trump was a
bad actor I just done this piece which
was plenty of evidence and that writing
a book with him would very likely
undermine my future credibility as a
journalist it would also subject me to
the legitimate charge of having sold out
the term was invented for what I was
about to do on the other hand my wife
and I had two young children we were
both journalists making modest salaries
and I was unduly worried about our
financial situation writing Trump's book
I rationalized could create security for
my family and free me to do whatever I
wanted
next what I really did was I told myself
a story that summit somehow made it okay
to do this book I pushed my concerns
about the kind of man he was
into the background and I'm reminded of
something that Jeb Magruder who was one
of the Richard Nixon aides who got
caught up in the Watergate scandal said
about himself
looking back some number of years later
somewhere between my ambition and my
ideals he wrote I lost my moral compass
I did the same and having done so I
focused on making the most of my
opportunity most writers for hire
receive a flat fee or a relatively
modest percentage of any money that the
book earns Trump and I Heigl back and
forth the art of the deal and ultimately
he agreed to give me 50% of the $500,000
advance my $250,000 chair in 1987 86 was
five times as I much as I had ever
earned in any year as a journalist he
also agreed to share 50% of any future
royalties that the book earned my mother
in particular was appalled
she disdained any focus on making money
and by writing this book
I was putting my finger in her eye and
although I didn't realize it at the time
it was my declaration of independence
from her perversely once the contract
was signed I arranged to meet Trump on
Saturday mornings at his penthouse
apartment in Trump Tower my plan was to
interview him for two or three hours at
a time until I gathered enough material
to write the book I imagined it would
take several dozen such meetings over
the subsequent six or eight months it
didn't take me long to realize I was
kidding myself
in our very first interview Trump became
impatient after answering my questions
after just a few minutes he was more
than willing to provide sound bites to
virtually any reporter who called him at
his office any time but it was nearly
impossible to keep him focused on any
single topic for more than five or ten
minutes he had a stunningly short
attention span this is so boring he
would tell me with irritation a few
minutes into any interview we did I
don't want to talk about what already
happened it's the past it's over if I
manage to keep Trump answering my
questions for 20 minutes I considered it
a major victory he was like a
kindergartener who couldn't sit still in
a classroom
my strong guess is that Trump has never
read a book in his adult life with the
possible exception of those written for
him and very likely not most of those I
know from the red marks he made that he
read the manuscript I wrote at one point
Trump agreed to let me accompany him to
Mara Lago the home his home in Florida
for a weekend my plan was to jam in a
whole series of interviews over 48 hours
so I could get progress on this book I
was struggling to get done his then wife
Ivana there have been a bunch made it
clear that she wasn't happy to have me
there and that was understandable he
worked long hours during the week didn't
spend
time with them and each time she walked
by us with one or another of his then
three young kids in tow she glared
eiseley at me and at him
I felt abashed he didn't seem to notice
or care a bit trump was about Trump he
had almost no interest in his wife or
his children when I didn't know at the
time is that he was actively carrying on
an affair with Marla whit maples
than women the woman who would
eventually and briefly become his second
wife more important to this story long
before lunch Trump stood up and
announced that he couldn't stand to
answer any more of my questions didn't I
have enough plainly I wasn't going to
get a books worth of material by trying
to interview Trump instead when we
returned to New York I simply began to
show up at his office most mornings
around 9:00 a.m. and invariably Trump
was on the phone when I arrived with his
permission
his delighted permission were he to have
been able to have another ten thousand
or ten million people listening that
would have been good from his
perspective I would pick up an extension
eight feet away from him and listen in
on his conversations for the next
several hours and often all day long
over six months and then intermittently
over the following year as I wrote the
book as I look back three qualities
behind beyond his inability to focus
strike me as alarming when I imagined
him as president the first is his utter
disregard for the truth and his lack of
conscience about that fact the second is
that he is guided entirely by what he
perceives as his immediate self-interest
and the third is his inability to ever
admit that he's wrong about anything
none of those qualities seem highly
desirable
in a president beside reporters Trump
spoke mostly during the day with lawyers
and bankers and brokers on deals he was
doing these people became a primary
source of material for the book after
each call or I should say after those
calls I would go out and interview them
to fill in the details that Trump was
incapable of providing to me himself
and it was in these conversations that I
realized I couldn't take anything that
Trump told me at face value the accounts
of these others often directly
contradicted Trump's and often they can
often they casually shared documents
with me that supported what they were
saying I was concerned but I
rationalized that I was writing a book
for hire it wasn't meant to be my
version of the events or even an
objective account this was his story and
he was stickin to it even in the face of
the most undeniable evidence to the
contrary more than any human being I
have ever met Trump has the ability to
convince himself that whatever he's
saying at any given moment is true or
sort of true or at least ought to be
true to this day lying is second nature
to him just one more way to gain
advantage if he was challenged about his
facts he doubled down still does it
today Trump does not admit to being
wrong he just keeps huffing and puffing
til he blows you down often the lies he
told were about money how much he had
paid for something or what a building he
owned was worth or how much one of his
casinos was earning even when they were
on the verge of bankruptcy I wrestled
with how to tell stories that I knew
included inaccuracies and eventually I
came up with this sentence aimed at
covering all potential untruths quote
people want to believe that something is
the biggest and the greatest and the
most spectacular
it's called truthful hyperbole
it's an innocent form of exaggeration
and a very effective form of permit of
promotion it's also insane there is no
such thing as truthful hyperbole
hyperbole is untruthful but it was
charming and we got away with it in the
end I created a character and Trump far
more winning than he actually is I never
found him winning or especially
intelligent or particularly interesting
but he was undeniably an effective self
promoter and that book went on to be a
number one bestseller around the world
what I did figure out in the course of
doing that book was how to transmute his
voice in ways that allowed him to come
off not as cynical and one-dimensional
which he was but rather to be kind of
boyish boyish and ingenuously even
charming here for Idzik for example is
how I had Trump introduce himself in the
art of the deal I don't do it for the
money
I've got enough much more than I'll ever
need I do it to do it other people paint
beautifully or write wonderful poetry
I like making deals preferably big deals
that's how I get my kicks in fact Trump
did do it for the money he never
believed he had enough just as he never
could get enough attention he didn't do
anything just to do it and he certainly
didn't think of his deals as poetry
because the word poetry was not part of
his limited vocabulary Trump did get a
kick out of making big deals but the
kick never lasted for long and he was
always ravenous for the next one over
time I began to think of this man as a
black hole there was nothing to sustain
him inside so he looked entirely to the
external world for nourishment no amount
of money or success or praise or
attention was ever enough
I never saw any evidence that Trump had
deep convictions or guiding core values
which helps explain why he can shift
positions so effortlessly and
unashamedly from one day to the next
every belief of trumps struck me as
negotiable for the right price or the
right advantage his most abiding
commitment and obsession and passion was
proving to others that he was a winner
whatever that seemed to require on any
given death and then broadcasting his
success whether or not it was actually a
success as far and as wide as possible
as long as I was working on this book
Trump was likely to call me at any time
of day or night my wife Deborah often
answered the phone when he called over a
year and a half she reminded me recently
Trump never once remembered her name nor
the names of my children or perhaps even
that I had children he knew my name but
not much more about me because he never
asked I was there to do a job and
conversations with Trump are one way I
didn't take it personally but this also
helps to explain why he had no
sustaining friends friendships for Trump
were entirely functional he was friendly
to people who helped make his deals
happen and unfriendly to those who stood
in his way
friendships came and went just as he
just as did his wives and his
girlfriends indeed with the exception of
anger Trump didn't traffic much in
emotions of any sort with the exception
of anger he could fly into a brief rage
if he was challenged about any of his
pronouncements most notably his net
worth which he equated with his personal
worth and therefore constantly inflated
but just as often Trump used his anger
as a means to an end and act he put on
when he thought it served him well and
then dropped as soon as he felt it got
him what he wanted the same was true
about Trump's beliefs easily ology
amounted to this
whatever so long as I win and people
notice I fully recognize that I have
painted an extreme portrait of this man
and that the vast majority of human
beings virtually all human beings are
more complex than the man I've just
described I also think that his
extremity helps to explain why he's been
an object of fascination for so long in
my own case I believe I was drawn to
Trump in part because he represented
what Jung would have called the shadow
side of myself
Trump grew up with a brutal father and a
mother with whom he seems to have had
virtually no relationship
it's oversimplifying to say that who he
is as a product of having lacked love
and care as a child and that he spent
and his entire life looking for it in
the external world but it's also true my
own childhood was less extreme certainly
than Trump's but I recognized my
experience in his the hunger for
unconditional love and acceptance exists
in all of us and its absence is always a
source of suffering Trump wears his most
primitive instincts his greed and his
grandiosity his lust and his envy right
there on his sleeve most of us do a
better job than he does at keeping these
sorts of feelings under wraps it's much
easier to see Trump as absolutely alien
to what we all stand for than it is to
recognize aspects of himself in
ourselves but what compromises have you
made in your own life where have you
rationalize dand explained away
decisions that were less than honorable
or ethical or kind where have you put
your immediate self-interest ahead of
others which parts of yourself do you
hide from others and perhaps even from
yourself
writing a book with Donald Trump was a
way I could live out these instincts in
myself my hungry desire for more money
and fame vicariously and without taking
direct responsibility for them I wasn't
much older than most of you are today
when I wrote the art of the deal at the
time I told myself that doing it wasn't
that big a deal and wouldn't have any
enduring consequences ha the truth is
that that decision the book and my
association with Trump has quietly
haunted and dogged me for thirty years
in many ways the rest of my life has
been a reaction to having written the
art of the deal the next book I wrote
was called what really matters searching
for wisdom in America my aim was to get
as far as possible from the values that
Trump represented instead I wanted to
hang out and write about people who had
led more reflective and intentional
lives who had goals beyond their own
immediate self-interest but
interestingly in five years of meeting
and working with psychologists and
philosophers scientists and mystics
who'd spend their own lives searching
for higher wisdom what I found was
complexity and contradiction I met
people who were often stirring in their
words and skilled in their practices but
these same people were also capable of
devolve entombed or primitive behaviors
and being blind to the contradiction
between their walk and their talk I
think of this now as our shared infinite
capacity for self-deception over most of
the past two decades I've run a company
called the energy project we've focused
on helping people and companies to
manage their work more skillfully to
fuel their own energy more skillfully
and as a result to live happier and more
productive lives
I'm proud of the work we've done but
I've also been humbled by it in the
years following the
the deal I wanted deeply to feel better
about who I was and to believe that it
was possible to reach some form of
enlightenment to get to the promised
land to truly move towards selflessness
if Trump represented one extreme of
human behavior I wanted the other
extreme and I want to leave you at this
moment with a more nuanced perspective
that is the product of these 30 years of
searching that have characterized my
life most of you are just entering
adulthood you've invested a great deal
to get where you are today to this very
special place that many regard as the
ticket to a successful life and in some
real measure that's true it's an
extraordinary privilege to have an
oxford education and it's an advantage
but whatever you may learn at Oxford
it's truly only the beginning of your
education
I myself have learned more in the past
decade than I did in the five decades
before it mostly what I've learned is
what it means to be more wholly human
just for a moment I'd like you to think
of a few adjectives that describe you at
your best just let your mind filter to a
few adjectives that describe who you are
at your best I'm so hopeful that each of
you now have a few now take a few
minutes to think about a few adjectives
that describe you at your worst who are
you at your worst
so now the $64,000 question which of
these lifts describes who you really are
is it not obvious that you're both along
with some grade agents in between isn't
that a more complete way of describing
yourself isn't it true that you can be
the worst of yourself but that that self
is not all of who you are and that you
can be your best but you're not always
your best this is what I believe true
growth and development personal
evolution are really all about seeing
more and excluding less I am today still
that person who made that fateful
decision at 33 year old 33 years old to
write a book with a man named Donald
Trump that will be part of my story to
the very end the instincts which
prompted the decision haven't
disappeared but I'm vastly more
conscious of them now and I have
commensurately more capacity to manage
them to make conscious choices about how
I behave in the world I've also grown
immensely over the past three decades my
perspective is wider and deeper and
longer I see my shortcomings more
clearly and I trust that my strengths
are real and enduring I don't spend
nearly as much energy as I once did and
as Donald Trump still does trying to
prove or defend my own value the result
is that I have far more energy available
to create value in the world loving
oneself is no easy matter the
psychologist James Hillman once wrote
because it means loving all of oneself
including the shadow where one is
inferior and socially so unacceptable
thus the cure is a parody
requiring two incommensurable x' the
moral recognition that these parts of me
are burdensome and intolerable and must
change and the loving laughing
acceptance of them just as they are
joyfully and forever one both tries hard
and let's go both judges harshly and
joins gladly seeing more and excluding
less accepting what Zorba the Greek
ruefully called the full catastrophe and
embracing it this is called a whole life
this is the life
Donald Trump has never lived and never
will but you could and I deeply hope you
will because to whom much is given much
is expected
thank you
Sonne thank you so much for that truly
insightful talk and I'd like to start
off with a very difficult question what
are five adjectives that describe Donald
Trump at his best that is a difficult
question you know I've been asked many
times
what are his redeeming qualities you
know everybody else redeeming qualities
and it was embarrassing to me not to
have an answer to that for some time he
is persevering he is aggressive in
pursuit of his goals I'm running short I
mean that's one I think I think that's
perseverance perseverance
that's a here's the thing if you took
Donald Trump's perseverance and
aggressiveness and applied them to a
virtuous goal he would be very effective
there's that there's there's plenty of
energy there's just the wrong quality of
energy interesting and when he announced
his candidacy coming down the Golden
escalator holding your book did you
write him off like everybody else or
could you see this coming
I felt a terrible feeling in the pit of
my stomach when he got on that stage and
he said America needs the man who wrote
the art of the deal to be President
first of all I didn't think I was
qualified and second of all I didn't
think he was qualified and third of all
I thought if he would lie about that
when it was so not only so Payton Lee
untrue but so easy to disprove then he
would lie about anything and yes and
your answer to your question
I thought from early on not the very
earliest but early on that he could that
he could get the nomination and going
beyond the nomination how likely do you
think it is that the polls are wrong and
there were lots of quiet Trump voters
and that he could actually be in the
White House in January well I would say
I wish that the WikiLeaks weren't
happening and you know most mindful of
the fact that there's a this is a large
room and there's 400 or so people here
and I in a sense presented as if this is
the consensus and I recognize that there
are people in here who probably have a
very different feeling about Donald
Trump than I do and the reason I've been
speaking out it's not to take issue with
his policy positions I happen not to
agree with them but because I believe
he's his characterological deficiencies
are so great that they preclude his
being president and that whatever the
smoke and mirrors that are created in
the course of the campaign may make
people believe I lived with this man day
and night for a year and a half and I
have no doubt that my assessment of his
character is accurate and there
unfortunately isn't virtually anybody
else who's had as close a relationship
with Donald Trump who didn't sign a
nondisclosure agreement and therefore
isn't talking about it and to those sort
of divided opinions I want to read you a
quote that Michael Moore something he
said very recently you might have seen
this in the news he said where the Trump
means it or not is kind of irrelevant
because he's saying the things to people
who are hurting and that's why every
beaten-down nameless forgotten working
stiff who used to be part of what was
called
middle-class loves Trump he is the human
Molotov cocktail that they've been
waiting for do you think this is an
accurate prepared on listen we need as a
society in the US and given brexit here
and marine lepen in France and
nationalist movements all over the world
all over the Western world we need to
recognize that Trump didn't come out of
nowhere Trump came out of a deep
discontent and what was that discontent
I would argue that the primary reason
for that discontent is the tremendous
income inequality that has emerged it's
the dark side of capitalism it's a whole
group of people like the ones michael
moore described who grew up believing
that they were as entitled to the
American Dream as anybody else and had
been used to working crappy jobs but
getting paid reasonably well having some
version of that American Dream a nice
car a house a certain amount of security
and then all of a sudden the world gets
filled with a small number of people
like Donald Trump who control a vast
percentage of the wealth and they're out
on their backsides and the irony is the
Trump ought to be their enemy but the
reality is that they have reason to be
angry and it's not a surprise to me that
the most disenfranchised people in our
society who are white because Trump has
been so very ugly hating toward so many
minority groups but for white people who
are disenfranchised I get why they're
for him and a lot of the reason I'm
talking I'm speaking out is in the hope
that I can temper that anger with the
recognition that this man doesn't care
about them and why don't these
disenfranchised white people feel
represented by the Democratic policy
why aren't they yet because Democrats
and Republicans are in large measure
equal opportunity offenders when it
comes to the income disparity and to the
over embrace of a free market
you know unfortunately you can you know
you you look at the choice the clintons
made after they came out of office and
it was to run up their advantage and
that itself is a source of enormous
anger in people why they're not angry at
Trump for bringing in workers from
overseas and you know having his
products made in other countries is a
mystery to me it's not a complete
mystery the one other factor I would say
that makes sense to me is Trump is not a
traditional politician so they are
saying to themselves and maybe some
people some folks in this room are
saying to themselves he could be a
savior I'm desperate for a savior he
could be a savior and I'm gonna throw
caution to the wind because at this
point almost everyone understands that
this is a man with some pretty serious
limitations but it's a measure of the
anger that it's overcome by the hope so
let's talk about those limitations with
regard to the campaign and for many
people the line between the campaign's
strategy and its bethune eree
is quite blurred and I'm wondering from
your perspective how contrived is the
campaign and other blunders planned or
the scandals relished or is this
literally just screw up after screw up
it is literally screw up after it screw
up
I mean there is no planning in the sense
that Trump runs the store make no
mistake the reason you see tweets from
him that are self-immolating and crazy
is because nobody controls him he does
what he wants to do and there's not some
age standing next to his bed at 4:00
a.m. when he gets the impulse to send
out a tweet he the campaign is a is a
almost perfect reflection of the man
great I'm a last question before I post
on the audiences and how do you think he
is going to deal with losing if he loses
you're making me anxious first of all
I'm very superstitious and I don't want
to say that he's going to lose even
though I desperately hope he loses it
would be a true Black Swan event for him
to win but it was a Black Swan event for
him to win the nomination so I don't
rule it out having said that I do expect
him to lose and I do not expect him to
go quietly into the night he has kept
upping the ante as a drug addict would
the drug addict wants more current you
know mutts more cocaine or a pure dose
of heroin because they're forever
chasing the hi Donald Trump when it
comes to attention is forever chasing
the hi and so when this election ends
and he feels listen much more mentally
healthy candidates for president than
him have gone through extended periods
of depression following their losses
it's a huge public loss and humiliation
but Trump is not available to depression
he just won't go there I don't think so
instead he'll go to anger and he will
drum up that anger that's sitting inside
his supporters in any way he can to
provide evidence that he was wrong the
election was rigged and he didn't really
lose trust me when I say this when Trump
loses the election he will never
acknowledge he will not concede the
election and he will never acknowledge
that he lost the election because to do
that is to feel obliterated and he's not
going there
so it's going to be a dangerous tense
time in America in the in the weeks
after the election
thanks very frightening know if you do
have a question put your hand high in
the air and wait for the microphone to
come to you and then if the ideally
could stand up if you go to the girl yes
many would blame the current state of
the US media and journalism for the rise
of Donald Trump and if you agree with
that view I was wondering well first of
all wondering what your opinions are
about the US media in this presidential
election and if you agree with the
critics then what do you think needs to
change to prevent this kind of Donald
Trump situation from happening again
so I I actually don't believe that the
media is a huge factor in Donald Trump's
winning the Republican nomination and
I'm saying the nomination because the
media's perspectives changed
dramatically since the election and I
actually think the media has done a very
good job of bringing Trump's
shortcomings to to light since the
election since the nomination the reason
I don't think that they played that
bigger role is because I think the force
that was driving Trump was bigger within
the media and I also think the simple
truth about journalism is you go where
the story is and rightly or wrongly it's
very hard to resist Trump that's the
story he just is very good and here's a
here's a capacity he has
he's an unbelievably effective
manipulator of the media to get
attention he's no longer an effective
media manipulator to get positive
attention but he is he is capable of
getting attention in terms of what I
think will happen or should happen I
think that introspection in the media
has already begun I've had a lot of
conversations with the reporters who
were traveling with the candidates in
the last several months because of the
role I played and I think a tremendous
bridge has been crossed and that
positive bridge that bridge is the
recognition that quote objectivity is
not actually giving equal attention to
two sides of an argument if one's
argument is completely and utterly
without credibility and so you'll start
to see now you have started to see in
headlines things like Trump lied about X
that's typically something you see on an
editorial page it's appropriate on a
news page when it's factual Thanks
could you go to general the front bench
over there thank you very much
so my question is whether you think that
Donald Trump leads his constituents or
whether Donald Trump's constituents lead
him as in do you think that these
policies were originally coming from him
and he recognized later on that they
would play so well or whether he by some
method found out that this was really
kind of at the beating heart of America
and therefore took up these policies and
became their standard-bearer it's a
complicated question because when he
came down from that escalator to
announce his candidacy and he said you
know the people streaming in from
Mexican from Mexico are rapists that was
not spontaneous he'd been planning that
line for a long long time and he had
figured out quite some years earlier
that he could stoke the fears and
interest of a certain constituency by
creating a polarized world and
setting up in this case Mexicans but
subsequently Muslims and blacks and
women and you know virtually everybody
but white men as the enemy so I do think
that there was a lot of conscious
thinking about this what's interesting
to me over the last six weeks since
Steve Bannon has taken over his campaign
Steve been and is a you know leader of
the what's now called the alt-right but
you know in the old days would have been
called the Ku Klux Klan and I have
watched very clearly the influence of
Steve Bannon on Trump's declarations and
I actually believe that the closer it
comes to his loss to his losing the
angrier and more like the alt-right he
becomes so it's like a powder keg people
already angry Trump not originally angry
just wanting attention now angry and
boom that's explosive is the woman to
the white top
leading on from that
do you believe from your experience with
Trump that he is a racist and that he is
a misogynist yes and yes yeah I mean I
had to stop and think about it there's
no question he's a misogynist I mean
that's just that speaks for itself
think about I had this analogy that you
know if I write if I when I was a
reporter wrote an article in a newspaper
this is pre-internet and I got you know
a dozen letters about it that was
considered a lot in fact the assumption
was that it reflected the desire of a
thousand people to have written but the
only ones who took the initiative were
those twelve in the case of those twelve
women who've come forward to accuse
Donald Trump of assault of sexual
assault they had to cross one heck of a
barrier to do that I mean what possible
gain is there for a woman to subject
herself to ridicule and humiliation by
Donald Trump a potential lawsuit the ink
peeping tom enquiries of many people
about the details so my assumption is
that there are hundreds and hundreds of
women out there who were sexually
assaulted or if not sexually assaulted
sexually approached and weren't willing
by Donald Trump
ergo misogynist as for racist my
experience with him was that he had a
peculiar kind of racism just as he has a
peculiar kind of anti-semitism so just
throw in a third one the the racism he
actually had huge admiration for a small
group of black men they were fighters
prizefighters and football players if
you were a prizefighter or a football
player Donald Trump admired you as a
black man
if you were virtually anybody else you
were not admired and then as for Jews
you know his attitude toward Jews and of
course his wife has converted and become
a Jew but quite honestly I don't think
that makes a damn bit of difference to
him he's no more friendly to Jews than
he would have been before that accept
her maybe he sees Jews as really really
effective people to handle his money so
he likes Jews who are accountants and
lawyers the rest of us not so much let's
go to putting the red top on the front
bench there one thing that this election
has seen is the traditional Conservative
Party having to completely change to
adapt to his form of conservatism how
much do you think the Cyprian see in the
Supreme Court has affected that and will
that swing the election has affected
what the current support among
traditional Republican leaders Wardrop
for Trump despite scandals well listen I
mean I'm a you know I I have very
progressive views and have always voted
not always but mostly voted Democrat
Democratic and it would take a really
bad Democrat in this election for me not
to vote for that person if Donald Trump
were a Democrat I wouldn't but the
reason would be the Supreme Court
because we are at a historic moment with
the Supreme Court where the future of
that Court will be determined for 40
years probably by the two or three or
maybe even four appointments that are
possible during the next four to eight
years so if I'm thinking of myself as a
conservative Republican I get that there
are a lot of them who are holding their
noses as hard as they can and saying you
know and and you know being upset with
what he's saying particularly
evangelical Christians being upset with
what he's saying
but feeling like I just got to do it
because the the shape of the world that
will emerge is so influenced by the
choices of the Supreme Court Tony has
better eyesight than me so he's going to
pick someone who's sitting at the back
yeah the gentleman with the beard
holding the high hand do you have a
beard that is the you were trying to
figure do you yes it is here well did
$70,000 a year mean that they're
educated that they have a college
education
I would say no it doesn't seventy
thousand dollars a year in the United
States as an amount you can earn in a
variety of ways an uber driver with no
education could earn $70,000 and a
factory worker in a good Union could
easily are in $70,000 so I'm not sure
that's convincing that it's educated
people that it's as many educated people
who are forum as we think but listen to
your point the faith among all kinds of
people at all income levels in all
levels of education in the once sacred
institutions of you know the society law
enforcement the clergy politicians and
the government virtually every one of
those has lost respect and esteem and
there are a tremendous number millions
and millions of people who are feeling
unmoored and unprotected and uncertain
and i think when you play on fear fear
taps into a different part of the brain
than rational appeals and trump is
really good as many
despot and authoritarian leaders have
been at stoking people's fears so if you
get a person to feel fearful enough they
might have a PhD but the level you're
talking to the mat is the level of a six
year old so that helps to explain why
smarter people who should know better
don't necessarily behave better I'll go
back to the back with the I know I
should go to a woman said I called
misogynist here so you work with Trump
over thirty years ago and now you see
him on TV and running for president is
there any let me not call it development
but change in this character that you
can see because I mean you've talked a
lot about how you've changed over the
years
so what how has Trump changed if at all
it's a fundamental principle of the work
we do at the energy project that you
can't change what you don't notice and
Trump doesn't notice he was just quoted
the other day in Michael Dantonio one of
his biographer one of his biographers
released a whole series of tapes of
interviews he done with men he was
quoted saying I don't like to I don't
look at I'm not willing to look this as
a not exact quote but I don't I'm not
willing to look inside myself because I
might not like what I see so my
experience of Trump is that he's very
much the same person he was when I met
him at 38 and then he was the very much
the same person at 38 that he was at 13
I had I had a I had a wonderful
experience that speaks to this and maybe
is a good way to end I've attended the
debates and I've been fortunate enough
to sit up very close so when the debates
and I'm able to go right up to the stage
and kind of experience what the
back-and-forth is so at the end of the
third debate the final debate in Las
Vegas I walked up to the front and there
was a sort of roped off area where they
were were
about what was going to happen there and
they want to make sure they were
protecting those two candidates so I was
standing sort of as you might if you you
know any celebrity were walking by like
as if I was a fan and a lot of others
were lined up there and Trump eventually
walked the line and as he walked the
line he would say how are you and lean
out to shake the person's hand so it's
one two three four and then he gets to
me and he reaches out his hand and he
says how are its you oh god it's you and
he pulls back his hand so I don't think
he's changed much ladies and gentlemen
thank you turning shorts everybody join
me in thanking him stay seated while we
leave